

**** *subject_litterature *subject_sociologie_litterature *type_article_scientifique 

*MISUNDERSTANDING_IN_FRANCE

By PROFESSOR ROBERT ESCARPIT

In Edmond Rostand's L'Aiglon, Metternich remarks that Napoleon after all was nothing more than what his hatter made him. We might easily say that Byron in Europe was hardly more than what Amédée Pichot made him. 
French was, in Byron's time, the main cultural language on the Continent and more litterati read it than read English. Countess Guiccioli never read the first cantos of Don Juan until she could use Amédée's translation - which led her to demand from her celebrated lover that he should interrupt such a naughty composition. Pouchkine and Lermontov certainly were acquainted with that translation and it was through it that Espronceda was initiated to Byron.
Among the French romantic poets, Vigny was the only one with a real knowledge of English at the time. Certainly Lamartine and Musset, probably Hugo, never knew Byron except through the channel of Amédée Pichot. 
Amédée Pichot, who was born in 1795 and died in 1877, is probably one of the first of what could be termed "English scholars" in France. He wrote many geographical, historical and literary essays on Britain. He translated, among others, Byron, Thomas Moore, Walter Scott, Dickens, Macaulay, Bulwer Lytton, Thackeray. Byron was, of course, his best seller. In twenty years his royalties ran well into fifty thousand francs - an enormous fortune at the time, and an unusual reward for a translator at any time.
Pichot's translation first appeared from 1819 to 1821.It was a ten volume edition-only the translators' initials were given and it seems that Pichot had been helped by Eugène de Salle. That edition, of course, did not include any later poem than the first five cantos of Don Juan. Byron did not think highly of it, as can be deduced from this remark in a letter to Murray dated October 12, 1820: "The French translation of us!!! Oime! Oime!" He also resented the account of his ancestry given by Pichot in an Essai sur le génie de Lord Byron prefixed to the translation (Letter to J. J. Coulman, July 12, 1823).
There were two more editions of that translation; then, from 1822 to 1825, Pichot published - it appears under his sale responsibility - a new and revised translation of the complete works in an eight volume edition which included, beside the Essai sur le génie de Lord Byron, a Notice by Charles Nodier, a translation of Medwin's Conversations with Lord Byron and two monographs on Byron in Greece.
French Byronism mainly springs from that source and, truth to tell, it is a rather polluted source: except for some parts of Don Juan, Pichot's prose rendering of Byron's poetry is an almost continuous misconstruction.

PICHOT certainly knew English and could write an expressive and even brilliant French, but what he was lacking was a true awareness of the realities of contemporary British intellectual life. He was twenty at the time of Waterloo, but most of his references still belonged to the 18th century. That was the case for most French people who had been cut off from Britain's main intellectual trends for more than twenty years and still lived on the heirloom of Ossian and preromanticism, as they relied on the Sturm und Drang for their image of Germany. Even Madame de Stael, who had been twice in Britain during the wars and well knew Byron, hardly mentions at any length in her Considerations sur la Révolution Française (which was to be a De l'Angleterre) any later poet than Cowper, except Wordsworth and Southey - and that in a rather casual way. Byron, Shelley, Keats are entirely ignored.
The reading public when Pichot published his first translation wars still tuned on 18th century habits of thinking and feeling. The success Lamartine's earlier effusions met was due less to their novelty than to their obvious relationship with pre-romantic poetic diction. Even when the French romantic school gathered strength after 1824, it probably owed more to English pre-romanticism and to German Sturm und Drang than to later trends.
Byron's death was certainly one of the major events which shocked that generation into actual romanticism - admitting that Byron himself was a Romantic, which he would have denied. But Byron's poetry came to it through Amédée Pichot's translation which was neither romantic, nor Byronic.
There is at the beginning of the fourth Canto of Childe Harold an example of one of Pichot's most significant misconstructions. Stanzas 6, 7, 8 and 9 comment on the powers of imagination:

Such is the refuge of our youth and age,
The first from Hope, the last from Vacancy;
And this worm feeling peoples many a page,
And, may be, that which grows beneath mine eye:
Yet there are things whose strong reality
Outshines our fairly-land; in shape and hues
More beautiful than our fantastic sky,
And the strange constellations which the Muse
O'er her wild universe is skilful to diffuse:
I saw or dream'd of such - but let them go -
They came like truth, and disappeared like dreams;
And whatsoe'er they were - are now but so:
I could replace them if I would, still teems
My mind with many a form which aptly seems
Such as I sought for, and at moments found;
Let these too go - for waking Reason deems
Such over-weening phantasies unsound,
And other voices speak, and other sights surround,
I've taught me other tongues, and in strange eyes
Have made me not a stranger; to the mind
Which is itself, no changes bring surprise;
Nor is it harsh to make, nor hard to find
A country 'Lilith - ay, or without mankind;
Yet was I born where men are proud to be,
Not without cause; and should I leave behind
The inviolate island of the sage and free,
And seek me out a home by a remoter sea?
Perhaps I loved it well: and should I lay
My ashes in a soil which is not mine,
My spirit shall resume it - if we may
Unbodied choose a sanctuary.

This is now Pichot's rendering:
Voila ce qui console la jeunesse dans ses espérances déçues et le vieillard dans ses tristes loisirs. Cette sensibilité blessée peuple plus d'une page de ses créations, et peut-être celle que je compose en ce moment. Ah! pourtant il est des objets réels qui l'emportent sur cette féerie; ils sont plus beaux en formes et en couleurs que nos deux imaginaires, et que ces constellations étranges dont la muse ingénieuse sait orner son univers fantastique.
Je les ai vus, ou peut-être je les ai rêvés... N'y pensons plus... ils s'offrirent à mes yeux comme la vérité, pour disparaître ensuite comme des songes. Quelque chose qu'ils aient été d'abord, maintenant ils ne sont pour moi que des songes. Je pourrais les remplacer si je voulais... Mon esprit peut produire encore des formes semblables à celles que j'ai cherchées et trouvées parfois. Mais j'y renonce... la raison qui se réveille en moi, repousse ces fantasmes comme de vaines erreurs: d'autres voix me parlent, d'autres objets m'entourent.
J'ai appris d'autres langues; j'ai cessé d'être etranger dans des pays qui ne sont pas ma patrie ; I'esprit qui sait être lui-même n'est surpris d'aucun changement, et il ne lui est pas difficile de trouver une patrie au milieu des hommes, hélas! ... ou dans les déserts affranchis de leur présence. Je suis né cependant dans une contrée dont les hommes sont fiers d'y avoir recu le jour, et non sans cause; si j'abandonne à jamais cette île, séjour sacré de la sagesse et de la liberté ; si je vais chercher une autre patrie au delà des mers ...
j'aimais la mienne peut-être ; Et si je dépose mes cendres dans une terre étrangère, mon ombre retournera dans ma terre natale, si l'âme, séparée du corps, peut se choisir un asile.

Obviously Pichot met in the second line a rather puzzling difficulty for a logical Frenchman nurtured on Rousseau and Voltaire: how can any sane man seek a refuge from hope? Of course, one understands very well such a statement in the 20th century. Byron's attitude in this case being very close to some of our contemporary philosophies of life. The feeling of nothingness, the sense of absurdity are quite consonant both with Byron's psychology and with the moral crisis he then experienced.
Pichot, unable to understand such an aggressive pessimism, boldly blots out the pessimism and turns the refuge from hope into a mawkish consolation for the disillusions of life.
Amusingly enough hill knowledge of English was quite sufficient for him to realize that he was deliberately sinning against accuracy. In his later and revised translation he made a gallant yet unrewarded attempt at interpretation:
"Tel est le refuge ou notre jeune âge porte ses espérances".
The trick is rather sly. The refuge from hope is turned into a refuge for hope. The disillusion is a menace, no longer a reality. But it is still there.
The disillusioned man is a well-worn theme in which Pichot feels at ease. So that when Byron in the following line mentions his "worn feeling" (which might be translated feebly by lassitude or strongly by sentiment du vide - bearing in mind the "vacancy" which threatens old age and which Pichot ignored), Pichot unbelievably turns it into sensibilite blessee. There, at least, Pichot's contemporary readers knew where they were, however far that might be from Byron. The man with a wounded sensibility has been for a generation quite a
popular figure. Byron is immediately classified along with Werther and Rene among the doleful and disillusioned characters of preromantic imagery.
It was not surprising, then, that many people who had read Pichot (and not Byron) considered Byron as a true spiritual son both of the early Goethe and of the early Chateaubriand. Byron might have accepted Goethe in the twenties, but he strongly resented Chateaubriand whose politics at that time he hardly could approve. Even a man who knew Byron well, like Stendhal. defined the Romantic movement in 1816 as "Werther, Rene, De l'Allemagne... le productions de Lord Byron" (Letter from Stendhal to Crozet dated October 1, 1816).
Having thus started on the wrong track Pichot could not but misunderstand Byron's defiant mood when he is challenged by the miseries of exile, when he refuses to seek in poetry an alibi against the demands of action among men and as one of them, and when he manfully fights in the name of "waking reason" the "wild" inspirations and "unsound" phantasies which had lately made him doubt his own sanity.
"Wild" is toned down into fantastique (a much weaker word than the English "fantastic"), and "over-weening phantasies unsound" is tepidly rendered as ces fantômes comme de vaines erreurs.
So that when Byron proclaims that he will have a country (Pichot introduces here the far-fetching connotations of the French "patrie") even if he is not wanted in the one country he considers as his own, Pichot turns the aggressive "ay, or without mankind" into a quite misleading "ou dans les déserts affranchis de leur présence", thus introducing the old Rousseauist theme of the yearned for solitude when solitude was probably about the only thing Byron did not wish at the time.

This misconstruction makes Byron's passionate profession of patriotism utterly unintelligible. When he alludes to the "inviolate island" (a hard historical fact after the Napoleonic wars), Pichot turns it into a vague "séjour sacré", In the same way he changes the "sage and free" (i.e. actual men) into "la sagesse et la liberté" (i.e. general principles), even indicating in a footnote that "sagesse est ici sans doute pour philosophie", And again we find here a well worn 18th century theme, that of Montesquieu's England as Madame de Stael piously reproduced it, while Byron's idea of Britain reflects a kind of liberal pre-jingoism much closer to the John Bull image than to the traditional figure of 'the "philosophie".
The fact is John Bull was never very popular in France, especially in the 19th century. Pichot has excuses. He did his best.
The youth of the rising 1830 generation in France were probably less attracted by the writings of Byron, as they were available to them, than by his political figure and especially his death in Missolonghi. Paradoxically enough that gave them for a few years a more penetrating understanding of one essential aspect of Byron's personality than the British middle class then derived from an actual knowledge of his writings. They may have misunderstood the literary man - partly thanks to Pichot; they certainly understood the revolutionist Byron was. Among those who were fighting the world over for the freedom and independence of the peoples he played a part very similar to that which Che Guevara has played in our days.
That aspect of Byron's historical personality has been carefully (and perhaps deliberately) ignored, not only by British readers, but more generally by a majority of Byron scholars. Although the more scathing stanzas of Don Juan are often quoted, few people seem to have read the bitter attacks against the landed interests in the Age of Bronze, and fewer still have cared to read the even more pungent and deeper criticism of the parliamentary speeches. Even Karl Marx once stated that Shelley was a true revolutionist while Byron was not.

Marxist scholarship has rediscovered Byron many years later - but that is another story. It remains that, when all is said and done, Byron's literary influence on French writers amounts to little. Two books seem to have said long ago all there is to say about his influence on French Romantics. They are Edmond Estève's Byron et le romantisme irancais (1907) and Cannat's Le sentiment de la solitude morale chez les romantiques et les parnassiens (1920).
The Pichot version of Byron inspired quite a good many lines to Lamartine. Vigny borrowed a number of Byronic attitudes from Childe Harold, in La Mort du Loup for instance. Hugo was attracted by the Byronic hero, particularly in Hernnani, but owes more to the Germans. Byron's Eastern tales ("Stick to the East," Madame de Stael once said to Byron) did much to spread the fashion of "l'orientale" as a literary genre among the French Romantics. Madame de Stael was far-sighted: it certainly proved an excellent investment. Mussel's more flippant narrative poems of the first period avowedly owe much to Don Juan and there is still something of the Byronic rumination in the darker poems of the later period.
On the other hand, it is quite probable that a close scrutiny of Stendhal's narrative style would reveal an influence of Byron's prose at its best - but then Byron's prose is totally neglected in France.
What appears more clearly is the fascination of Byron's death, although much more as a lyrical gesture than as the deliberate and carefully planned operation it was. All the politically frustrated French romantic poets (and they all felt frustrated in the twenties) felt the itch to write "un cinquième chant de Childe Harold", and some of them did in one way or other. But none of them went to Greece or anywhere. Lamartine wrote somewhere in his Correspondence this rather piteous remark: "I too would have gone and died for the Greeks if I had not been a married man."
If we were to find a true Byronic influence in French literature we should have to look into later productions which, although popular, did not belong to the literary Establishment. The Byron myth as the dark avenger, the undanted and aristocratic champion of justice and freedom, threw the poet into oblivion. The Comte de Monte-Cristo in Alexandre Dumas is a strongly Byronic character, with obvious reminiscences of Lara, The Giaour and The Corsair, and we must bear in mind that he rescues, protects, avenges and then marries the daughter of Ali Pacha, Byron's old acquaintance. In Jules Verne, Captain Nemo is also a typical Byronic hero and his apostrophe to the Ocean is strongly reminiscent of the famous passage in Childe Harold. The topography of L'Ile Mystérieuse in which Nemo chooses to die, was borrowed from Byron's The Island. Nemo too helped the Greek insurgents as well as all the fighters for independence and freedom throughout the world, whom Byron certainly would have helped if he had been able to afford a Nautilus.

The ironic fact is that Captain Nemo - Prince Dakkar - is an Indian and that his main foe is British imperialism. It is hard to say whether Byron would have relished being thus enrolled into the French anti-British campaign, but it is quite probable that a few decades later he would have been among the first to denounce the crimes of colonialism - French or British. The Centenary brought to France a Byron revival. Three books of unequal value stand out in a rather mediocre production. One is Andre Maurois' talented biography (1930) whose only fault is that it could be almost exactly the same even if Byron had never written a single line. Another and more literary study is Professor Castelain's Byron (1931), a brilliant presentation whose scholarship unfortunately rests more on intuitions than hard work, and Charles Du Bos' profound essay, Byron et le besoin de la fatalite (1929).
When I was a student of English literature in the thirties, the views of the French University on Byron were a sad medley of gossip, stereotypes and trite misconstructions derived from the Pichot tradition. My own knowledge of Byron's poetry was limited to the few passages of Childe Harold and Don Juan which any student of English literature was bound to have read at some time or other.
Chance attracted me towards Byron. I read his Correspondence and Journals in the Prothero edition while I was laid up with appendicitis in July, 1939. I discovered a fascinating personality quite different from what had been revealed to me in the course of my studies. I was particularly shocked into enthusiasm by the Parliamentary speeches, being myself at that time rather involved in militant politics. I decided such a man's writings deserved being read and I read them several times as best I could during the war years.
I ought to say that, after a painstaking and passionate perusal of every single line of Byron which was available at that time in France, my views on Byron did not entirely agree with the accepted ideas of the French academic world. The formal defence of my thesis in front of the Sorbonne in 1952 was much of a sporting event. My first words were: "Byron has been talked about much more than he has been read" - an unpalatable but incontrovertible fact at that time.

Although Byron scholarship has much improved now in France, I do not think his writings have been given the justice they deserve. I have made the experiment several times among learned audiences: a majority of English scholars never have even heard about Werner or The Island, which I consider as much worthier literary achievements than many a better known poem of the earlier period. Periodically Childe Harold or Don Juan appear among the texts of the Licence, the Maitrise or the Agregation programmes. We have a brilliantly Voltairian translation of Don Juan, a well-meaning yet unsatisfactory translation of Childe Harold, and a more recent and excellent translation of The Prisoner of Chillon, which has roused great interest.
Indeed, there is a renewal of interest in Byron among the younger generation of English scholars in France. In 1974, for the 150th Anniversary the Société d'Etudes Romantiques and the Société des Anglicistes de l'Enseignement Supérieur have read or published quite a number of interesting papers on Byron.
The Byron we are likely to rediscover will certainly be very different from the Byron of the 19th century cultural legacy.
I am personally struck by the modernity of the political character. The Parliamentary speeches can be read even now not as historical documents, but as testimonies on problems which belong to our time.
The Missolonghi period also appears to me as something which has a deep meaning for us. Quite recently I bandied Byron quotations with an irate reader of Le Monde about the Cyprus situation.
In 1944 I was reading the documents referring to Byron's activities in Missolonghi when I had to leave my thesis in order to help fight my own Turks out of my own country, and I was then struck by the similarity of the problems which had become my own at my lowly level with Byron's problems in his leading position.
In fact, I remembered the Spanish Civil War where I had my first assignment as a journalist in 1936. Much of what Byron did or wrote then reminded me of Andre Malraux's L'Espoir. I have come to think there is a close resemblance between Malraux and Byron, although I have been told there was no direct influence. The heroes of Malraux's first novels have certainly something of the Byronic touch in them and Malraux's early ideas on the freedom and the independence of the people were quite similar to those of Byron. Up to a certain point (in fact the dying point) he played for my generation a part which is comparable to the part Byron played for the Young Europe generation. He was the same age as Byron in Missolonghi when he went to fight for the Spanish Republic and I have found in L'Espoir a passage where Magnin (a very Byronic self-portrait of Malraux) tries to organize his international air squadron, which reproduces almost word for word an order of the day of Byron trying to organize what was perhaps the first revolutionary International Brigade in history.
Malraux survived the Spanish War. It was an error or at least a misfortune. If he had died then and there he might have become the Byron of the 20th century. Sometimes I hear people wonder what Byron would have become if he had survived Missolonghi. It is rather a weird and altogether unattractive idea for a Byron lover that he might have ended as a Victorian Minister of Culture.

**** *subject_infocom *date_1979
*are_media_really_abundant?

COMM. (Sankt Augustin) 5,203-212(1979) Robert Escarpit



Are Media Really Abundant?


Reading a paper on media abundance is perhaps something of a problem for a man who is not at all sure that he knows what is meant by media. If broadly speaking, we accept to stick the label media on the various means used to disseminate or broadcast information in the present world, i.e. mainly newspapers, radio and television, the appreciation of their abundance may be understood in several ways.
 
One may think in terms of networks organized around a number of specific information sources, each of those networks being a more or less evolved, a more or less efficient system specialized in the gathering, the selection, the treatment and the transmission of information. In such a case the abundance has to be measured by the number of sources, i.e. the number of independent newspaper titles, of independent radio or television programmes rather than transmitters. According to such a view, we might be inclined to say that the situation of radio and television in Italy is one of superabundance and that in France it is one of comparative dearth.

One may also think in terms of contents. It might be possible to calculate how many bits of information or, more vaguely, how many news items are poured daily on a given population. I'd be inclined to say that the world record must belong to Mexico City, where a powerful radio station transmits all day long an uninterrupted news service at a fantastic speed of utterance, inserting from time to time, for rentability, short commercials which are read at a still higher velocity. I have made out that the output must be steady 120 to 150 bits a second and an average of 150 to 200 news items an hour. Considering the normal capacity of a human brain, this certainly is a case of overfeeding.

One may then think in terms of receivers. The notion of a receiver is clear in the case of radio and television and rather vague in the case of newspapers. One always can count sets, but you don't need a set to read a newspaper. We may, however admit that, just as the number of titles gives us a fairly good idea of transmission abundance, the number of copies sold or distributed gives us a rough idea of reception abundance. Such an approach is a favourite of many scholars in communication. I have used it myself quite a number of times for the study of readership. It is an easy way out of a difficult problem, since figures, however questionable, are available in many places and especially in the UNESCO so-called statistical yearbook. Some interesting data may be drawn from such figures. For instance the evolution of the per capita consumption of newspaper copies is sometimes enlightening. The British in the fifties and the Scandinavian in the sixties were obviously threatened by a surfeit of newsprint. But did they really read all that was printed on the paper? I began to have my doubts about the limit of counting copies and counting sets when precisely in the sixties, I noticed that, as everybody knows, there were more radio receivers in North America than were inhabitants. I told myself that if someday it appeared that there were more than two receivers per person, I'd have to look for a third ear in American anatomy or admit that such figures needed a good amount of behavioral interpretation.

Behaviour leads us to the man who reads the newspaper or sits before the set. Last but not least, one may think in terms of audiences. Who reads, listens or watches? What do they choose to read, listen or watch, and why? How do they do it and when? How much time do they spend on reading, listening or watching, and eventually how much money? If such data can be gathered in a fairly accurate way, that is certainly a very sane and reasonable approach. But can they?

Audience behaviour is generally understood as a case of mass behaviour, and, again, I am not at all sure that there is any such thing as mass behaviour. In the fall issue of 1977 of the Journal of Communication, I made bold to criticize the notion of mass (used in the singular) as a misleading concept evolved by American sociologists of the thirties to cope with the rising tide of numbers when precisely the development of radio in the United States confronted them with new, unmanageable hyperdimensional problems.

It is true that the use of the concept of mass allowed to quantify quite a number of hyperdimensional social phenomena through elaborate statistical surveys. We must not underrate the very worthy results obtained by the methods of Berelsonian and Lazarsfeldian sociology, but we must not be blind to the fact that those results are extremely crude and need a huge amount of micro-analysis. The main difficulty in handling the mass concept is that it rests on the basic postulate that the social tissue is homogenous. Without that homogeneity, the sampling process which is the current procedure for surveys is meaningless. Now, postulating the homogeneity of the social tissue reduces society to a mass, i.e. an enormous undifferentiated protoplasmic cell, a kind of giant amoeba with amoebic responses. Of course, there is some truth in that view of things.

The trouble is it is a very insufficient truth. Indeed, we are protoplasmic beings and our behaviour, be it individual or collective, normally retains something of the primeval protoplasmic quality, but nobody could seriously say that it is its essence or specific quality. Any sociologist is perfectly aware of that. It is all the more surprising that while micro-sociology makes of the study of organization, its main object, macro-sociology should have chosen an approach which, by definition, negates the very existence of organization. On the other hand, above all the sociology of communication cannot underrate the fundamental significance of the individual as a free agent and a thoroughly differentiated component of the social body. Apart from God, the individual human brain is probably the main source of information existing in creation and perhaps the only one. As my colleague, the physicist Andre Marchand very aptly put it in one of our seminars in Bordeaux, no transaction of energy may be called communication unless at least one individual human brain is implicated in the process. 

In fact the mass approach cannot reveal us anything more than the non-essential, the non-significant in human communication. In all human sciences there are only two kinds of methods for data gathering: objective and subjective - have a look and ask questions. Objective data gathering in a mass perspective is difficult and needs a good amount of hazardous interpretation. 

One of the best cases of objective observation was when, many years ago, the French television asked all televiewers to switch out their sets for sixty seconds at a given signal. It was then easy to read on the dials of the regional and national power stations the drop in electricity consumption and then make a rather accurate evaluation of the number of sets in use at that moment. If such an experiment could be repeated many times, at various hours and in various circumstances, it would certainly yield a huge amount of information. 

The trouble is that such an information, however revealing it might prove to the manager, the engineer or the dealer, would be of very little use to the communicologist, or at least its value would hardly justify the trouble. For the communicologist, the prizewinning question is not so much how many sets are on or off, but what is really happening when they are on. This is true of any kind of communication. The fact that in France, a little less than 300 copies of newspapers per 1000 inhabitants are circulated every day does not mean much as long as we do not know by how many people and how each of those copies is read. We are all aware that (here is. a wide difference between the man who buys Le Monde only to tuck it under his aim as a status symbol, and the man who painstakingly spends several hours a day perusing its contents in a public library.

Since the apparition of the cheap transistor sets, the number of receivers is purely an economic fact, not a communicational fact. Presumably few people listen to two sets at the same time except for stereophonic purposes, and when people actually listen, there is a wide difference between the man who keeps his set going all day long as a background noise to his daily activity and the group of connoisseurs who concentrate on a concert transmitted on a high fidelity channel. 

As to television everybody has known for many years that the saturation mark for developed countries is around one set per household, but there is a wide difference between the group of hearty friends who, while playing cards in the local cafe, shoot an occasional glance at the football match on the screen when the uproar warns them that a goal is about to be kicked, and the man who deliberately selected that evening to watch an old cinema favourite. 

Such differences cannot be accounted for by mere objective observation. One cannot avoid asking questions and rely on the subjectivity of the various persons implied in any questioning. A quarter of a century's experience has led me to consider the handling of a questionnaire as a fascinating pastime, a highly impressionistic form of art and a thoroughly unscientific procedure when more than rough trend indicators are sought. 

I started my research at the time of the Kinsey report and fairly soon discovered that people lie much more about their cultural behaviour than their sexual behaviour. Those lies are not always deliberate and they may be the result of more or less unconscious censorship. Many years ago, I was spending my holidays with a colleague of mine, now deceased, who contended he could be entirely frank about his readership. During a fortnight, without telling him, I observed him and carefully timed and noted down all his reading activities. I then submitted him to a standard questionnaire which he answered carefully. He was rather taken aback to find that he had entirely omitted the thirty odd minutes he had spent every day skimming through the comics magazine of his son. He afterwards protested, saying that skimming or leafing is not reading. 

What then is reading, what is listening, what is watching? Even if we have a choice of verbs for closed questions, how are we going to account for the continuous shifting, sometimes in a split second, from one type of behaviour to another one? While I am writing those pages, my radio set is open on my table, and I am quite aware that my mind has registered quite a good many information out of which my medium-term memory has sorted a few items, but can I say I was actually listening in except during the few seconds when a particularly relevant news item was mentioned or particularly arresting musical piece held my attention for a while? Familiar as I am with those problems, I am quite unable to appreciate in the five or six hours a day such a process lasts, what percentage has been devoted to actual listening and to subconscious surveillance. How then could a person entirely unaware of those problems give a significant answer? And then listening in is a comparatively simple one-channel process. Television watching is infinitely more complex and reading still more complex. Skimming, leafing through, browsing, consulting, spelling, reading aloud, perusing, poring over, or as we say in French "lire en diagonale": there is an infinite variety of verbs to describe very poorly indeed and very subjectively the infinite variety of different kinds of reading, none of which is a permanent or specific behaviour. Only very fine laboratory methods could allow grasping the extremely rapid shift from one type of activity to another. This is a case for experimental psychology, not sociology. 

What sociology is able to grasp is a communicational environment, but it cannot do it without starting from concrete communicational situations in groups well under the critical size beyond which the productive activity of individual human brains ceases to be perceptible. That means we need more case histories and more case descriptions. Only through a careful analysis of hundreds or thousands of such small size situations, will it be possible to work out patterns free from any misleading postulate. 

In the second part of this paper, I intend to offer a rough sketch of what such a case description could be, taking the example of the small community in which I am living and showing how the phenomenon of so-called media abundance is lived by its members. That community is the village of Accous, in one of the valleys of the Pyrenees in south-western France. It is situated at an altitude of 1800 feet half-way up the valley, 15 miles from the Spanish border. The overall population of the township is 500 persons, one half of which live in isolated farms or small hamlets and the other half in the village which actually is a small town, Accous having been the capital city of a small mountain republic with a population of more than 2 000 in the 18th century. There are 13 such villages disseminated all along the valley. The population of the village proper counts an abnormal-amount of elderly people - about 50 %—and roughly 10 % of children under 15. The active population is mainly composed of shepherds, farmers, and artisans, with a sprinkle of "intellectuals": the schoolmaster and his wife, the cure, the postman and probably a dozen retired professional people. Some of the outstanding members of the community do not reside permanently in the village, their professional activity being located in one of the neighbouring towns. It is the case of the mayor, a postman, and of the first alderman, a teacher. In summer there are few tourists and few extraneous people except the staff of a few holiday camps for schoolchildren. The population however doubles in thai period of the year, when members of the families who work in other parts of France or outside France come to spend their holidays. Some of them have fairly high positions in the army, the university, the railways, public works or electricity. The educational level is rather good and the people of the valley are noted for their quick minds and glib tongues. The official language is, of course, French, but in everyday life, people hardly speak any other language than the local dialect of Bearnese. Bearnese is a variety of Gascon, itself one of the languages of the great Occitan family. Besides most people understand and speak Spanish fluently. 

Only the winter situation in the village proper will be considered here. Newspapers are sold by two small general stores. The titles are uncommonly abundant for a country like France where in most cases only one local paper is to be found. In Accous there are three: the Pyrenees edition of Sud-Ouest, the Bordeaux regional, and then two locals: L'Eclair from Bayonne and La Republique from Pau. The latter is obviously the favourite. Its correspondent for the valley resides in Accous. The number of copies is 25 in one store and 10 in the other, but many people buy their newspaper in the neighboring village of Bedous where there is a newsagent. More or less 50 copies are thus sold. The postman distributes 10 to 15 more to subscribers. Only three or four copies of national dailies like Le Monde or Le Figaro are included in the mail delivery. A fair evaluation of the number of copies distributed daily in the village would be between 65 and 70. That means, for a population of 250 a consumption of slightly over 250 copies a day for 1 000 inhabitants. That was exactly the national French figure in the sixties and it is not very far from the present figure. It is certainly higher than that of several European countries. We may then admit that, as far as newspapers are concerned, this outlying village is far from a situation of underdevelopment and fully participates in the modern abundance of media.

The radio situation is more complex. In this case, the number of sets is almost meaningless. Apparently, there is at least one in each household and no re if there are teenagers in the family. Shepherds who spend the winter in ι he village usually have one which they take to the mountain pastures in summer. The availability of the programmes is more interesting. Owing to the mountainous configuration of the ground, the reception of short and medium waves is rather poor, a fact which prevents the inhabitants of the valley from listening to the one regional programme broadcast from Bordeaux and to the scanty local programmes broadcast from Pau or Bayonne. The great long wave private stations like Radio Luxembourg and Europe No. 1 which are so popular in France are almost inaudible and the one programme which can be received loud and clear is the national Paris managed France Inter. This station may also be obtained on the P.M. network which, paradoxically, is used in France to relay national, not local programmes. France Musique can also be heard on P.M. but the reception is poor. On the other hand, several Aragonese local or regional stations come in loud and clear from P.M. aerials on the Spanish side of the border.

In spite of the comparative abundance of receiving sets, the scantiness of the programmes and especially their lack of connection with local and regional life seem to discourage the audience. In conversations with the villagers, it can be easily observed that few allusions are made to radio programmes or news. This is a very noticeable fact since in most regions of France, radio remains the most efficient channel. In towns like Bordeaux, where there is a local programme, however scanty, its importance is comparable to that of the local edition of the regional newspaper.  

The case of television again is different. Discounting the sets of the temporary residents, about 50 aerials may be counted on the roofs of the village, to which must be added 20 sets connected to a collective aerial installed on the roof of the town hall. The reason of that collective aerial is that the easternmost part of the village is screened off by a mountain from the sending aerial located at the entrance of the valley. 70 sets in the village mean that the television equipment is rather higher than the French average and has reached the saturation point. According to the local plumber who makes it a thriving business of selling sets, the main change in the last few years is the shift from black and white to color. The first French national programme is received permanently from Bordeaux, the other two are received regularly but depending on weather conditions from Toulouse via the Pic du Midi. This double origin has a curious consequence when, three-quarters of an hour a day all senders broadcast regional programmes: the village receives the South West programme from Bordeaux on one channel, and the Center South programme from Toulouse on another.

This is obviously a case of superabundance both in receiving equipment and in programme availability. But then it is also a case when one has to take into account audience behaviour. According to my observations, the listening time is on an average extremely short. Only elderly people and children on a holiday watch television during the daytime, although the former often prefer to go pottering about their gardens or chatting with the neighbors, while the latter is more often on the mountain slopes than in their houses. It is quite a current sight, on entering a house, to find the television on in the living room or in the kitchen, and nobody to watch it.

At night people come late from work and go to bed early. It is seldom they watch the second part of the night programmes after 10. Again according to the conversations on the following day one can see the most frequent choices are variety shows with known singers or films, but a still more frequent remark is: "It bored me so I switched off". In many cases, one does not even bother switching off and the conversation goes on briskly according to the old peasant tradition with the background of screenplay and song. Sports and more especially football are a notable exception. Indeed for a majority of men in the village watching television means seeing a match. When the match is important, it is quite an occasion and during the period of the World Cup work stopped almost everywhere at the moment of the most important encounters. An important feature is that few people like to enjoy a match alone so that watching is an opportunity for a social gathering with the usual amount of talk, card playing and drinking. Indeed in such a case, the reception of the T.V. message merges into the broader pattern of la fete, the traditional Gascon feast. 

Most people watch one of the two national news services of 8 P.M. either on the first or the second programme. There are few comments other than jocular, but the ensuing conversations show a great degree of awareness in the population, especially when the issues mentioned in the news have a direct bearing on local life. For instance, the problem of the entrance of Spain into the Common Market is often discussed. Spain is only a few miles away and the attitude toward the cousins of the mountain valleys of Aragon is one of mixed distrust and kinship. National political issues are certainly not ignored. The valley is on the left side. The Socialists are well organized and there are quite a good number of Communists and sympathizers. But that has practically no bearing on the local life of the village. I have seen both the municipal campaign in 1977 and the legislative campaign in 1978. The television appearances of the national leaders were considered as good or bad shows regardless of the tendencies. After all, you cannot expect much from those people from the plain. Serious things are debated in the village on a clannish basis more than on a political one. The mayor, a former Socialist who turned majority a few years ago is supported by the more progressive part of the voters. He is an ambitious young man, but then he is ambitious for the village. No word, admonition or advice coming on the media can change that. 

The fact is that in that village where media are as abundant as in any city and sometimes more, they have practically no influence on the life of the community. The reason is that they are outside the community, they are extraneous, foreign. As I said, the everyday language is Bearnese, and not one single word of Bearnese is ever spoken on radio or television. One of the local newspapers publishes a weekly page in Bearnese, but comparatively few people are able to read it in the new normalized Gascon spelling.

The fundamental and prevailing feeling about the media is that they are useless because they are one-way. They allow no possibility of expression, response and consequently influence. Quite recently Antenne 2 broadcast a programme in that region which has been entirely prepared in Paris and was grossly erroneous and misleading. The municipalities tried to oppose the broadcasting and the regional council even obtained a judgment vetoing to it. In vain: the programme went on the air in the name of the freedom of information. It was a deliberate insult to a whole population who does not enjoy the privilege of informing the others on itself. Indeed this allows me to say that if there is an effect of the abundance of media in France, it is the Parisian right of misrepresenting France. But that is not an effect of the media as such: it is an effect of the centralized political system which monopolizes the media. Take my village as it is, with its equipment and its customs, but put it in a decentralized system, with real regional programmes, a local radio station speaking the vernacular, perhaps a small local weekly to be sold on the market every Tuesday, and the same media which are now ignored will be a most efficient tool for a rewarding and productive community life. Even national programmes and national influences will be welcome since there will be a means of answering, of wielding a counter-influence.

By way of conclusion, I shall quote an anecdote which will show the pattern of influence as it works now. Any man who lives in the valley is implicitly mobilized in the service of the valley, and especially those who have any influence in the outer world, which is not uncommon. At any rate, it is my case since I have been a University President and have written daily for over thirty years in the national daily Le Monde which is read by few people in the valley but is known to wield a good amount of influence. 

Last year, the mayor of the neighboring village of Osse came to me to ask for my help. He explained to me that the Ministry of the Interior had had for more than forty years in his village a nursing home for the children of its staff members. A sizeable amount of money had been recently spent on the modernization of the place which could receive up to 200 children. Suddenly the Ministry decided it no longer needed such a home and closed it down. That meant the disappearance of 25 jobs in the village and a heavy economic loss. A number of associations had proposed to use the place for a home for disabled children, but the project was vetoed by the Pau psychiatrists who understandably preferred private patients. The influence of the said psychiatrists was enough not only to stop the project but also to establish very efficient censorship about it in the newspapers and on the media. The mayor asked me to write about it in Le Monde, which I did. My article awoke memories on the minds of half a dozen of State Councilors, judges, politicians who were born in the valley and did have influence. Within six months the home was open and working again. I do not think that any of the villagers have read my article in Le Monde, but they all know that the influence channel which I represent worked in a satisfactory manner. They are reasonably thankful about it but not overmuch, since my intervention, as a member of the community, was, from the beginning, taken for granted. 

This little anecdote may seem to have little connection with the criticism of media investigation which I presented at the beginning of this paper. In fact they both try to preach the same creed: that media is media, that is to say, etymologically places where messages are exchanged, only if there are men to exchange messages. I say exchange, not send and receive. And, as Pope said, not media, not machines, but man is the proper study of mankind.



























**** *subject_infocom *type_article *date_1977
*the_concept_of_mass

The Concept of “Mass”



by Robert Escarpit

Born of the shock of rising numbers, 
it is a double-edged creation obscuring newly
emerging group identities and rights.


Byron was one of the first writers in history who sold more than 100,000 copies
 of a book in a comparatively short time. Only a few years before, sales of the 
current best sellers seldom exceeded 2,000 to 3,000 copies. Writers knew many 
of their readers and were comparatively at ease within the social group for 
whom they wrote and from whom they drew most of their inspiration and craft.
 Suddenly this reassuring interlocutor turned into a faceless, shapeless, and
 rather frightening monster which Vigny compared to the boundless ocean into 
which the poet throws the castaway’s bottle. On receiving a letter from an 
Oregon reader, Byron wrote that it was “like receiving news from the country of 
the dead.


The “mass effect” seems to arise when an observer‘s channels of communication are inadequate to the number of people with whom he has to deal. The
“mass effect” was used by the French Revolution’s armies against the classical 
generals of the European Coalition. It backfired on Napoleon -himself a classical general- when he tried to handle the oversized Grande Armée and lost
 Waterloo, the experts say, for lack of proper channels of communication between his fighting units.


Loss of control through the institutional network of communication is what 
gives the person or group in charge the impression of recognized groups like an
 audience or a military unit turning into a crowd or a rabble, i.e., incipient 
masses. In fact, these are still groups with well-defined communication and
interaction patterns, but those patterns are unidentifiable or unacceptable for 
the disconcerted observer.


Robert Escarpit teaches Theory of Communication at the University of Bordeaux, France,
of which he is the President. His latest book is Thkorie gdndrale de I‘informtion et de la communication (Paris: Hachette, 1976).



The shock of numbers had that effect on the British upper class when the
 social aftermath of the industrial revolution during the Napoleonic wars turned
the industrious people into a dangerous, rioting, frame-breaking mob. The
normal channels of communication being disrupted, that mob appeared to 
steady and wealthy citizens like Frankenstein’s monster. One of the very few
 voices which denounced that image was precisely that of Lord Byron in his first
parliamentary speech at the House of Lords on the twelfth of April, 1812. “You
 call these men a mob,” he told his peers, “and yet they are workers who produce 
your wealth, the servants who ensure your comfort, the soldiers who fight for 
your freedom.” The concept of mass thus stems from the inability to define or
 recognize a workable communication organization in a very large group.


When Morton Deutsch tried to enumerate the various criteria which may
define a group, he found seven. The first is “two or more persons who have one
or more characteristics in common.” In fact what is thus defined is not a group, 
but a set in the mathematical sense of the word, i.e., a collection of elements
with a common characteristic that allows one to determine whether a given
element belongs to the set or not.


But set relationship is different from group relationship. In a set the various 
elements need not be interconnected by any channel of communication allowing interaction between them: all blue-eyed people are a set to an outside 
observer even if they have never heard about one another, but they are not a 
group in the communicational use of the word.


Of course, things may change if a significant part of the members of the set 
acquire a clear awareness of the characteristic they have in common and of the 
collective behavior it implies. All black-skinned people are a set, but when they 
acquire a clear awareness of the patterns determined by their common characteristic, they become “the Blacks” who channel their action into claims for a
 social status, for independence, or for power. They are no longer a set in the mathematical sense of the word, but they are not a group inasmuch as their 
number puts them far above the critical size beyond which internal communication channels can work efficiently.



What these people become, then, is a hybrid between 
the set and the group, which I call a group-set.


Thus what are currently called “masses” would appear to be intricate
 systems of group-sets. It might be objected that my notion of group-set is 
already accounted for by Tönnies notion of <i>Cerneinschuft.</i> That is not really 
true. Some group-sets may evolve into communities, but most of them do not.
People with a common characteristic may choose to join a social setup (club,
 society, union, party) which tends to build them up into an influential organization, but most of them choose to remain loose and anonymous, although they 
may react as members of the group-set on certain occasions such as religious 
practice or voting.


What is needed to turn an aggregation of individuals into a group-set is the 
influence of a leading person or organized group pointing out some common 

characteristic and developing the social behavior attributed to it. The way such 
an influence may be exercised over the often widely scattered members of the
set is fundamentally a problem of communication.


While communication remained limited in its range to small communities,
 the spreading of the group-set forming influence required the energy and
tirelessness of traveling apostles and missionaries. In fact, group-set phenomena 
were first observed in the propagation of religious information, the “good news” 
being, for instance, that those who were preached to had the common characteristic of having been redeemed by Christ, which implied for them a certain 
common pattern of behavior. Christians and Moslems are members of worldwide group-sets, whereas Jews have usually been members of a community. The 
attempts of the Christian leaders to turn their group-set into a community led 
them to split into churches and sects while Islam preserved the vague but 
efficient awareness of belonging to those who live by the Koranic commandments. One will note here the decisive part played by the most ancient of all
 broadcasting machines: the Book.



The diffusion of information into an
anonymous, multi-dimensional population is the
basic condition of group-set formation.


The “working class” is a typical group-set. For thousands of years people 
have worked for masters and employers, but the only common characteristic
which enjoyed any amount of awareness was buying power and the ensuing
standard of living and social status, so that the only sets recognized were the rich
and the poor. That was an elusive and baffling characteristic, inasmuch as it did 
not coincide at all with the actual economic and social relationship: there always
 have been poor masters and wealthy slaves, inpecunious employers and well-todo employees. The poor/rich criterion did not allow the shaping of a permanent
 group-set consciousness, although it may have been used to that end in part of
 Christ’s preaching and in some sporadic revolts and mutinies throughout history.


Marxian theory afforded a new criterion which was a socially determined 
and precisely describable relationship between the actual producer of value and 
the owner of the means of production. But such an abstract and elaborate notion
 would have been far beyond the grasp of the workers themselves if not for a 
dramatic change in communication techniques at the time of its emergence. 
Mid-nineteenth century was the turning point when the age-old mouth-to-ear
spread of information was gradually replaced by mediated communications,
 thanks to the dramatic progress of readership of both books and newspapers and 
to the multiplying effect of the railway and the telegraph on the flow of 
communication.


It was then possible to embody the practical lessons of Marxist theory into 
easily readable pamphlets which allowed hundreds of thousands, then millions 
of workers throughout the Western world to acquire class consciousness. Later,
 unions and parties tried to weld the emerging group-set into various types of hierarchical and disciplined institutions (not unlike churches) which, although 
they may diverge on points of doctrine or strategy, implicitly accept the teaching of the Book, the basic covenant of their common identity, be it the pragmatic teaching of the Manifesto or the deeper analysis of Das Kapital.

Although such a group-set as the conscious working class may term itself 
“the masses” in order to stress and strengthen the power of numbers, it does not 
function as what is generally understood by sociologists as a mass. In fact, it is a
gigantic communicational system composed of more or less informal small 
group clusters into which the union or party organization introduces small 
leading groups whose function is to maintain both class consciousness and class 
behavior.


Diffusion techniques, like readership in the nineteenth century, are promoted by the dominant classes with the hope that the massification of communication would be an excellent way of reinforcing the existing social structure and
of counteracting the spread of class consciousness. But they may backfire.


Both small group relationships formed under local conditions and institutional community relationship imposed by historical circumstances are, so 
to speak, short-circuited by new group-set relationships, although most of them 
retain the pattern of old communicational structures (family, school, church,
nation), if only to challenge them.


One of the most typical and, in a way, absurd yet productive instances of this
 phenomenon is “consumer consciousness.” By definition all living organisms 
belong to the set of consumers. In a highly industrial society with a market
 economy, that common characteristic may be formulated as a particular relationship with organized industry and trade, and a specific pattern of behavior 
may be deduced from it. Now all over the Western world the consumers’ groupset is well established. Although in some cases it has organized itself into 
pressure groups and information systems, its influence mainly rests with the
 individual, anonymous behavior of conscious, yet unorganized buyers, i.e., with 
the members of the group-set.


Many more examples of characteristic twentieth-century group-sets could be
 given: the feminist movement was one of the first, but the notion of youth as a
group-set, apparently even more absurd than that of consumership since the
 characteristic is highly transient, is one of the most obvious features of present day societies.


The result is that the concept of mass is rapidly dissolving to be replaced by
the puzzling yet far more workable image of an intricate network of communication channels in which new group-set identities are born year after year with 
corresponding behavioral patterns and balance of influences. This means of
 course that the study of “mass communication” will have to evolve into research 
on group-sets’ interaction and conflicts for the control of communication channels.


REFERENCES


1. Deutsch, Morton. “Group Behavior.” In International Encyclopedia of the Social Sciences, Vol.
6. New York: Macrnillan, 1968, p. 265.

